
# WRAL COVID-19 dashboard changelog

[WRAL's dashboard of COVID-19 statistics and charts](https://www.wral.com/coronavirus/north-carolina-coronavirus-cases-maps-graphs-live-updates/19010016/) has evolved since its initial launch in the early stage of the pandemic. We'll track changes to our metrics and tracking methodology, and note any corrections to our data here starting on Sept. 5.

## Sept. 5, 2020 - Correction

During the week of Aug. 30, the N.C. Department of Health and Human Services made corrections to its reported case counts for several days in August after LabCorp reported a delay of nearly 1,000 positive test results.

DHHS posted the following explanation on its data dashboard ~~Sept. 3~~ Aug. 31 *(correcting date disclosure was first posted)*:

> On August 29, 2020, LabCorp submitted approximately 1,163 positive
> tests results for which the majority were completed during the first
> of half of August 2020. Because one person may have multiple tests,
> these tests represent 886 unique cases. This submission caused an
> artificially high number of cases reported for August 29. These 886
> cases have now been distributed to the dates in August when they would
> have been reported to the state.

And in response to follow-up questions on Sept. 4, DHHS spokesperson SarahLewis Peel wrote via email: 

> In updating the NC COVID-19 county-level cases data impacted by the
> LabCorp data delays, cases were distributed to the dates in August
> when they would have been reported to the state. However, the delayed
> data on 8/29 that had been received were not subtracted from that
> day’s date.
> 
> On 9/4 at 4:35 p.m. NCDHHS updated all state and county-level cases
> data on the NC COVID-19 dashboards impacted by the LabCorp data
> delays.

Using time-series data of reported cases [published by DHHS](https://public.tableau.com/views/NCDHHS_COVID-19_DataDownload/DailyMetrics?:showVizHome=no), WRAL corrected its own numbers at about 3 p.m., Sept. 5, for the period from Aug. 1 to Sept. 5. The changes ultimately redistributed 886 positive cases across 23 days in August 2020.

This correction impacted the following metrics and trend lines on WRAL's data dashboard:

 - Reported new cases
 - 7-day rolling average of reported new cases
 - 7-day rolling average of tests reported positive

For a detailed breakdown of the changes, [download a comparison of data](https://github.com/mtdukes/nc-covid-by-zip/blob/master/misc_corrected_data/data/corrections_20200905.csv) captured by WRAL from Aug. 1 to Sept. 5 and corrected data published by DHHS as of Sept. 5.

### Data field layout for [corrections_20200905.csv](https://github.com/mtdukes/nc-covid-by-zip/blob/master/misc_corrected_data/data/corrections_20200905.csv)

**date** Date of reported cases, in MM/DD/YYYY format

**reported_cases_uncorrected** Number of reported cases based on WRAL's data, calculated by subtracting the current date's total number of cases from the total number of cases from the previous date.

**running_total_uncorrected** Total number of positive COVID-19 cases by date, captured by WRAL daily via the [DHHS Cases dashboard](https://covid19.ncdhhs.gov/dashboard/cases).

**reported_cases_corrected** Number of corrected daily reported cases published by date by DHHS on its [About the Data](https://public.tableau.com/views/NCDHHS_COVID-19_DataDownload/DailyMetrics?:showVizHome=no) portal, downloaded in spreadsheet format by WRAL on Sept. 5.

**running_total_corrected** Total number of corrected positive COVID-19 cases by date, generated by calculating the running total of daily reported cases from DHHS.

**reported_cases_difference** The difference calculated between reported daily cases corrected by DHHS and uncorrected reported daily cases collected by WRAL.

**running_total_difference** The difference calculated between total cases corrected by DHHS and uncorrected total cases collected by WRAL.

## Sept. 10, 2020 - Redesign, revised methodology

On the evening of Sept. 10, WRAL rolled out changes to the chart showing cumulative COVID-19 cases, cumulative COVID-19 deaths and a rolling average of hospitalizations due to COVID-19.

### Redesign of hospitalizations

Because the hospitalization data is a rolling average and not a cumulative total, we separated these figures into their own distinct graph for clarity.

### Redesign of cases/deaths

The large number of cases relative to deaths made the latter hard to see on a combined, so we also separated these metrics into seperate charts, allowing users to swap between them and view each on a variable scale.

### Changing how we track cases and deaths

WRAL also changed its methodology for tracking and capturing these cumulative cases and deaths. In the initial months of the pandemic, the WRAL reporting team captured real-time data by monitoring individual case counts on both the state level and for each of North Carolina's 100 counties. But as the cumulative totals grew, the variation between state officials' daily updates in the morning or early afternoon and the tally gathered from each county throughout the day became less and less significant. We've now reverted to using total case counts published each day by the N.C. Department of Health and Human Services, dating back to when the agency began releasing statewide figures on March 13.

For a detailed breakdown of these changes, download a [comparison of data](https://github.com/mtdukes/nc-covid-by-zip/blob/master/misc_corrected_data/data/corrections_20200910.csv) captured by WRAL from the state/county level tracking compared to WRAL's data captured from the N.C. DHHS figures published since March 13 (Note that because the real-time numbers were being updated throughout the day, they're almost always higher than the figures published earlier each morning by NC DHHS that are now used for the graphs).

### Data field layout for [corrections_20200910.csv](https://github.com/mtdukes/nc-covid-by-zip/blob/master/misc_corrected_data/data/corrections_20200910.csv)

**date** Date of data capture for either cumulative or real-time cases/deaths

**cumulative_cases_realtime** The sum of new reported COVID-19 cases initially gathered by WRAL and updated continuously throughout the day from state and county health departments.

**cumulative_cases_daily** The cumulative total of lab-confirmed COVID-19 cases published by N.C. DHHS through its statewide dashboard.

**cumulative_cases_difference** The difference between the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases from DHHS (reported around noon each day) and the cumulative total of COVID-19 cases tracked by WRAL throughout the given date.

**cumulative_deaths_realtime** The sum of new reported COVID-19 deaths initially gathered by WRAL and updated continuously throughout the day from state and county health departments.

**cumulative_deaths_daily** The cumulative total of COVID-19 deaths published by N.C. DHHS through its statewide dashboard.

**cumulative_differences_deaths** The difference between the cumulative number of COVID-19 deaths from DHHS (reported around noon each day) and the cumulative total of COVID-19 deaths tracked by WRAL throughout the given date.

## Sept. 11, 2020 - Revised methodology

On Sept. 11, WRAL rolled out changes to the county-level chart showing cumulative COVID-19 cases and deaths due to COVID-19.

### Removed metrics

Previous versions of this map included data on **percentage of the population with cases** and the **number of cases in long-term care homes**, both of which were removed in the updated version.

The percentage of the population with confirmed cases has remained too small to provide much value, so we removed it to simplify the graphic and focus on the remaining metrics, like the rate per 100,000 of each county's population. 

Although the state does track ***active*** outbreaks and clusters in long-term care homes by county, it doesn't detail the specific number of cumulative cases by county in its public dashboard. And even county-level data on cases in these congregate facilities can lag, making it hard to compare with numbers updated for each county daily. We removed this metric because it's frequently inaccurate and only occassionally updated.

### Added metrics

The tooltip overlay now includes a calculation for deaths per 100,000 population.

### Changing how we track cases and deaths

WRAL also changed its methodology for tracking and capturing cumulative cases and deaths on the county level. In the initial months of the pandemic, the WRAL reporting team captured real-time data by monitoring individual case counts on both the state level and for each of North Carolina's 100 counties. But as the cumulative totals grew, the variation between state officials' daily updates in the morning or early afternoon and the tally gathered from each county throughout the day became less and less significant. The manual process of comparing and updating each counties changes also delayed daily updates on the map.

WRAL introduced a semi-automated process of downloading county-level data [from the N.C. DHHS dashboard](https://covid19.ncdhhs.gov/dashboard/about-data) from the agency's daily publication of new COVID-19 figures, and we use that data to power the revised county-level map.

We're also independently calculating per population statistics (based on per 100,000 of each county's population) using the July 1, 2019, population estimates from the [U.S. Census Population and Housing Unit Estimates](https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest.html). This might mean slightly different numbers than the state uses for its own calculation (since they're using different population estimates).